WIP: KEP-5283: DRA: ResourceSlice Status for Device Health Tracking (#5469)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5283-dra-resourceslice-status-device-health/README.md

documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

With Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), devices that can be allocated to Pods
are advertised in ResourceSlices. Device entries in a ResourceSlice describe
properties like identifiers, capacity, and firmware or kernel driver versions.

Sometimes devices fail and an automated agent or cluster administrator must take

> some action to restore the device to a healthy state. This KEP defines a
> standard way to determine whether or not a device is considered healthy.

Reviewer: This sounds like a bigger scope than the KEP title.  

```suggestion
Some action is r to restore the device to a healthy state. This KEP proposes 
A new entry to the ResourceSlice object to allow DRA drivers to report whether or not a device is considered healthy.
```

Author: I think I would prefer to change the title then if this statement is too far off from it.

@johnbelamaric Would it be appropriate to retitle #5283 something like "DRA: Device Health Status" that doesn't imply any particular solution like adding a new `status` field in ResourceSlice but specific enough to differentiate it from #4680?

Reviewer 2: The "summary" section condenses the KEP, so it the proposal is to extend ResourceSlice status then it's important to mention here because it clarifies what readers should expect when diving into the details.

But the "motivation" section shouldn't include that yet because it is an implementation choice. There might be other ways to solve the problems described there.

-->

Since the DRA APIs currently do not expose a standard way to classify device
health, cluster administrators are tasked with finding other means of doing that
for each kind of device that is defined in a ResourceSlice in order to identify
and restore unhealthy devices back to their full functionality.

When unhealthy devices are no longer able to support new or existing workloads,
DRA drivers and cluster administrators already have the option to
[taint](https://kep.k8s.io/5055) the devices. A standard representation of
device health in the ResourceSlice API is needed to express the state of the
devices in cases where the side effects (`NoSchedule`/`NoExecute`) of taints are
not desired.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Expose well-formed data in the ResourceSlice API representing the real-time
  health of the devices a ResourceSlice describes.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Define what constitutes a "healthy" or "unhealthy" device. That distinction is

>   made by each DRA driver.

Reviewer: This non-goal collides with what you said on the `summary` section, line 184

Author: This non-goal is only saying that Kubernetes doesn't care about the underlying characteristics of a device that cause a driver to consider it healthy or not. The summary says cluster administrators are interested in identifying and remediating unhealthy devices. Are those at odds with each other?

Reviewer 2: I agree that this is problematic. Either this KEP limits itself to just defining fields that can be used in a vendor-specific way or it attaches additional semantic to those fields which then must be followed by all drivers. There are pros and cons for both.

Reviewer 2: Based on these non-goals, the KEP seems to be in the "no semantic" camp. That raises the question whether device attributes would be sufficient, perhaps combined with ["admin-controlled device attributes"](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5027).

Reviewer 2: At first glance I don't see the connection. Device health needs to be reported, whether a device is allocated or note. The ResourceClaim status is about providing additional information related to the allocation (for example, the assigned IP in the case of a network interface). I would not use it for the overall device health, although the "raw data" escape hatch in the status would allow that.

change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

A new `status` field will be added to the ResourceSlice API, along with fields
for health information for each device listed in the ResourceSlice:

```go
type ResourceSlice struct {
	...

	// Contains the status observed by the driver.
	// +optional
	Status ResourceSliceStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// ResourceSliceStatus contains the observed status of a ResourceSlice.
type ResourceSliceStatus struct {
	// Devices contains the status of each device.
	// +optional
	Devices []DeviceStatus `json:"devices"`
}

// DeviceStatus represents the status of a [Device].
type DeviceStatus struct {
	// Name maps this status to the device listed in .spec.devices.
	//
	// +required
	Name string `json:"name"`

	// Health contains the health of a device as observed by the driver.
	//
	// +optional
	Health *DeviceHealthStatus `json:"health,omitempty"`
}

// DeviceHealthStatus represents the health of a device as observed by the driver.

> type DeviceHealthStatus struct {

Reviewer 3: The [dra-health/v1alpha1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/dra-health/v1alpha1/api.proto) gRPC service implemented in [#130606](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/130606) already provides a stream of health updates from the DRA plugin to the Kubelet. This same gRPC service could be leveraged as the SoT for populating this new `ResourceSlice.status` field.

Reviewer: ++

Reviewer: PR https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/130606 introduced 
```go
type DeviceHealthStatus string

const (
	// DeviceHealthStatusHealthy represents a healthy device.
	DeviceHealthStatusHealthy DeviceHealthStatus = "Healthy"
	// DeviceHealthStatusUnhealthy represents an unhealthy device.
	DeviceHealthStatusUnhealthy DeviceHealthStatus = "Unhealthy"
	// DeviceHealthStatusUnknown represents a device with unknown health status.
	DeviceHealthStatusUnknown DeviceHealthStatus = "Unknown"
)
```

Reviewer 3: I believe the DRA driver is the source of truth for device health here, not the Kubelet. In the architecture I implemented for KEP-4680, the kubelet acts as a client that consumes health status streamed from the node-local DRA plugin via the `DRAResourceHealth` gRPC service. This design inherently handles the possibility of differing health perspectives between nodes(although, I don't see how there could be a legitimate discrepancy of the same device health between nodes). Since a `ResourceSlice` is published by the DRA driver running on a specific node, the health status it contains would naturally reflect the device's condition from that node's perspective.

Example assuming the device healths are used to populate ResourceSlice device statuses: 

* If a network attached device is experiencing issues from Node A, the DRA driver on Node A would reoprt it as `Unhealthy` in the `ResourceSlice` for that node. 
* Simultaneously, if the same device is accessible from Node B, the driver on Node B would report it as `Healthy` in its `ResourceSlice`.

Although, I think this would be odd, it shows that the current model should account for this scenario where one node has the same device as healthy and another as unhealthy. 

@SergeyKanzhelev, please correct me if I am wrong, but to the best of my understanding this is how the device health works with DRA now.

Reviewer 2: Making kubelet responsible for updating ResourceSlice status is not going to work for network-attached devices because there is no single kubelet instance which is responsible for those.

Reviewer 3: You both are right. Making the kubelet responsible for updating `ResourceSlice.status` won't work for network attached devices or multi-node devices. My work in KEP-4680 was intentionally focused on the node level problem of exposing health of a device **actively** in use by a Pod via the PodStatus. 

For the broader goal in KEP-5283, since we want to expose the health of unallocated and allocated devices, the responsibility should be on a cluster level component like the DRA driver's controller. 

How I see it:
- Node level dra drivers stream health for all of their devices via the new `DRAResourceHealth` gRPC from KEP-4680.
- Kubelet consumes this stream only to update the PodStatus of its local pods
- The DRA driver's central controller should aggregate these streams from all the nodes and would be responsible for writing the health state to the `ResourceSlice.status`

Essentially, only leverage the new gRPC stream and health data inflow from DRA drivers, but not on the Kubelet's updating of status.

```go
type ResourceSlice struct {
	...

	// Contains the status observed by the driver.
	// +optional
	Status ResourceSliceStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// ResourceSliceStatus contains the observed status of a ResourceSlice.
type ResourceSliceStatus struct {
	// Devices contains the status of each device.
	// +optional
	Devices []DeviceStatus `json:"devices"`
}

// DeviceStatus represents the status of a [Device].
type DeviceStatus struct {
	// Name maps this status to the device listed in .spec.devices.
	//
	// +required
	Name string `json:"name"`

	// Health contains the health of a device as observed by the driver.
	//
	// +optional
	Health *DeviceHealthStatus `json:"health,omitempty"`
}

// DeviceHealthState represents the overall health status of a device.
type DeviceHealthState string

// These are valid conditions of a device.
const (
	// DeviceHealthy is the state for a healthy device.
	DeviceHealthy DeviceHealthState = "Healthy"
	// DeviceUnhealthy is the state for a unhealthy device.
	DeviceUnhealthy DeviceHealthState = "Unhealthy"
	// DeviceUnknown is the state for a device whose health is unknown.
	DeviceUnknown DeviceHealthState = "Unknown"
)

> // DeviceHealthStatus represents the health of a device as observed by the driver.
> type DeviceHealthStatus struct {
> 	// State is the overall health status of a device.
> 	//
> 	// +required
> 	State DeviceHealthState `json:"state"`
> }

Reviewer 4: How about introducing a bit more info?? I think we can borrow several fields from [PodCondition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.26/#podcondition-v1-core ). For example:
```suggestion
// DeviceHealthStatus represents the health of a device as observed by the driver.
type DeviceHealthStatus struct {
	// State is the overall health status of a device.
	//
	// +required
	State DeviceHealthState `json:"state"`

	// Reason is the reason of this device health. It could be helpful especially when the state is "Unhealthy".
	// +optional
	Reason string `json:"reason"`

	// LastTransitionTime is the last time the device health transitioned from one state to another.
	// +required
	LastTransitionTime string `json:"lastTransitionTime"`

	// LastReportedTime is the last reported time for the device health from the driver.
	// +required
	LastReportedTime string `json:"lastReportedTime"`	
}
```

Author: Yes, more info like this is necessary for this to be useful. I was hoping to get some feedback on if this high-level approach is worth pursuing or if one of the alternatives listed below is a better place to start getting into more of the details of the API.

demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Since the DRA APIs currently do not expose a standard way to classify device
health, cluster administrators are tasked with finding other means of doing that
for each kind of device that is defined in a ResourceSlice in order to identify
and restore unhealthy devices back to their full functionality.

When unhealthy devices are no longer able to support new or existing workloads,
DRA drivers and cluster administrators already have the option to
[taint](https://kep.k8s.io/5055) the devices, which always carries a
`NoSchedule` or `NoExecute` side effect. A standard representation of device
health in the ResourceSlice API that is strictly informational enables the
widest variety of potential integrations (e.g. Node Problem Detector, custom
controllers, dashboards) which may implement custom mitigation strategies that
conflict with other side effects.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - Expose well-formed data in the ResourceSlice API representing the real-time
>   health of the devices a ResourceSlice describes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Expose well-formed data in the Kubernetes API representing the real-time
  health of devices that the ResourceSlices describe.
```

This is a bit more neutral regarding how this will be achieved. Depends of course on whether there are use cases that can only be satisfied if the data really is in the ResourceSlice.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

A new `status` field will be added to the ResourceSlice API, along with fields
for health information for each device listed in the ResourceSlice:

```go
type ResourceSlice struct {
	...

	// Contains the status observed by the driver.
	// +optional

> 	Status ResourceSliceStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: "By the driver" makes me wonder: is the expectation that this information is always going to come from the driver? It doesn't have to, it could also be a separate component which monitors the health.

This has implications for the API design. If it's always the driver, then including this information in the spec is better. We might even do it via standardized attributes in that case, which would completely remove the need for API changes.

Overall I am a bit weary about putting more information into ResourceSlice if it doesn't absolutely need to be there. It's already challenging to keep the maximum size of it within the required bounds.

Referencing the device is a bit simpler in the ResourceSlice (just needs the name) and it's easier to use in some way (just dump one slice), but it also makes it harder for an admin to actually find unhealthy devices. That would be easier with a dedicated `DeviceHealth` type where the health information is in the spec, potentially with field filters defined to support server-side filtering in a LIST operation. With one device per `DeviceHealth` there are no concerns about how big that object then becomes and there are no scale limits imposed by the API.
